Analysis of transcriptomics on SAGA
================
Marius Saltvedt
9/28/2021

-   [1 R](#r)
    -   [1.1 Extract sequences from
        genome](#extract-sequences-from-genome)

# 1 R

-   Introduction to stringr:
    <https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/stringr/vignettes/stringr.html>

## 1.1 Extract sequences from genome

-   If you only have the sequence position of the CDS regions, but not
    the sequences themselves you can extract them yourself.  

-   First we must load tidyverse `library(tidyverse)`

-   Then you must load the full sequence genome and the data sheet where
    you have your CDS sequence position numbers. You might have an excel
    sheet containing a column with gene number, sequence position,
    pos/neg strand etc like this: `gene_1|GeneMark.hmm|629_aa|-|2|1888`.
    Here you will find the sequence position starts at 2 and ends
    at 1888. You need to save this excel sheet as a csv file in order
    for R to read it properly. Below I have shown this together with
    selecting only the column that contains the neccessary info about
    the CSD regions.

<!-- -->

    annotation.df <- read.csv("PkVRF02.csv", sep=";") %>% select(CDS_regions)

    genome_seq.df <- read_lines("PkV-RF02_v2.fasta")

  
  

-   Next step is to isolate the numbers inside each row containing the
    CDS regions. Below we use the function `separate` to do this, and
    since we do not specify the separator symbol it will separate on any
    common separator type (- / \| . , \_ etc). If we take the first row
    as an example, it will split `gene_1|GeneMark.hmm|629_aa|-|2|1888`
    into eight new columns “Gene”,“Nr”, “Gmark”, “Hmm”, “aa”, “pos_neg”,
    “from”, “to”. Then we `select` only the `from` and `to` column that
    contains the position data.

1.  Gene - `gene`
2.  Nr - `1`
3.  Gmark - `GeneMark`
4.  Hmm - `hmm`
5.  aa - `aa`
6.  pos_neg - `-`
7.  from - `2`
8.  to - `1888`

<!-- -->

    position.df <- annotation.df %>% 
      separate(col=CDS_regions, into=c( "Gene","Nr", "Gmark", "Hmm", "aa", "pos_neg", "from", "to")) %>% 
      select(c("from", "to"))

  
  

-   Now we have isolated the CDS regions into one table and we can look
    into the genome sequence. To start with you should check that he
    whole genome sequence is listed as one continuous line or string.
    Often the sequence will listed over multiple lines with a
    `line shift` and then you will need to remove this `line shift` in
    order to easily access the position on the whole sequence. We can
    remove all line shifts by using a for-loop where we will go into
    every line and save/concatenate it as a continuous string/line.

<!-- -->

    #nchar()
    #str_length()
    #str_sub(x, from, to)

    genome_clean = ""                                             #1
    for (i in 2:(length(genome_seq.df)+1) ) {                     #2
      #if (i < 10) {                                              #3 
        temp <- paste(genome_clean, genome_seq.df[i], sep = "")   #4
        genome_clean <- temp                                      #5
      #} #end of if
    }

1.  Empty string, so we can use it to add strings to it
2.  for every nr “i” from 2 (excludes heading) to total number of lines
    in genome_seq.df + 1 (to include last line)
3.  you can test with only the first 10 lines by using “if”
4.  concatenate string in position “i” without separation to the object
    genome_clean
5.  save this concatenated string to genome_clean so it can be used in
    the next loop in step 4.

  
  

-   Now we have a continuous genome sequence and the table with CDS
    regions/positions. In this step we will make an fnn file that
    contains the name of the the sequence followed by the nucleotide
    sequence itself.

<!-- -->

    PkV_cds = ""                                                                          #1
    for (p in 1:(nrow(position.df) )) {                                                   #2
      temp.2 <- paste(PkV_cds, ">", annotation.df[p,1], " >PkV-RF02", "\n", sep = "")     #3
      temp.3 <- str_sub(genome_clean, position.df[p,1], position.df[p,2])                 #4
      PkV_cds <- paste(temp.2, temp.3, "\n", "\n", sep = "")                              #5
    }
    cat(PkV_cds)                                                                          #6
    #View file with line shift cat()
    write(PkV_cds, file = "PkV-RF02.fnn")                                                 #7

1.  Empty string
2.  for every number “p” from 1 to number of rows in position.df, do the
    following
3.  Creates heading that starts with “\>”, add gene nr, add ” >PkV-RF02
    and end with line shift
4.  Adds sequence “from” column “1” “to” column “2” for every row “p”
5.  Concatenate step 3 and 4 into object PkV_cds (concatenate heading
    and sequence with line shift)
6.  View output
7.  Write to file

  
  
